The topic of today's lecture is the control and assessment of the effectiveness of marketing activity.
This lecture consists of three sections.
In the first section, we will consider the problem of measuring the effectiveness of marketing as such.
We will look at the main model, which is at the heart of the entire assessment of the effectiveness of marketing.
This model is called the chain model of effectiveness.
In the second section, we will consider the main marketing metrics.
This is a tool for measuring the various aspects of the marketing activity of a company,
which is later used for control.
We will consider the control of marketing activity in the third section.
Now let's see what are the goals and tasks of our lecture today.
First of all, in order to start studying the control and assessment of marketing activity,
it is necessary to understand why this control is needed.
Because many companies believe that there is no need for this.
We will provide arguments in favor of the fact that control is necessary for every company.
And every company must study the results of its investment in marketing
and control them on a regular basis.
Then we will study the main marketing metrics.
I have completed quite a lot of practical tasks.
And by the end of the second section,
you all should learn to calculate the main quantitative indicators in marketing on your own,
to use them in your companies to measure the effectiveness of marketing activity.
After that, we will consider the main principles of marketing control.
We will see how the marketing metrics we have studied
are used for complex control of the marketing activity of companies
and assessment of the results of the activity.
We will proceed to the first part, to the execution of our first task,
to show that the control and assessment of the effectiveness of marketing activity are really necessary for companies.
Many companies in practice believe that such an activity as control is not necessary.
It is just a waste of money,
the time of employees and no tangible effect this activity gives.
Many companies really neglect control.
And, it would seem, they live quite happily.
But this is just the situation that is said to be happiness in ignorance.
Recently, a study was conducted by several American companies,
as a result of which they found that for every dollar invested in marketing,
they get a profit of only 70 cents.
They were horrified to find that all those huge investments in marketing that they made
actually brought losses to companies.
They could live in ignorance and on,
but now they understand that their marketing activity is ineffective
and they should correct their actions.
And think about whether your marketing is actually effective or not.
Do you get a profit from those investments that you invest in advertising
or other aspects of promoting your product or in the development of new products?
Therefore, every company must use control
of the results of its marketing activity on a regular basis
and find out the problems that arise in due time.
The problem of neglect of the control of the marketing activity
is typical for both foreign and Russian companies.
Among the foreign managers, a survey was conducted, which gave the following results.
66% of managers said that the control of the assessment of the effectiveness of marketing
is the most relevant problem for them today.
The problem is not only that the marketing budgets of many companies
are millions of dollars and they are second in many cases after the production costs.
The problem is that, unfortunately, many marketing specialists
still do not have the qualifications to fully assess the effectiveness of marketing.
As for Russian companies,
many directors of Russian enterprises often say
that Russian marketers often neglect the control of the effectiveness of their marketing activities
and cannot assess whether the marketing decisions they make are reasonable.
At a recent conference on the problems of teaching marketing in Russia,
the director of the marketing company Fort Motor Company stated
that her company also has a problem of assessing the effectiveness of marketing.
It is related to the following.
Russian marketers can develop the most creative advertising campaigns,
can offer great ideas, but they do not think about
whether it is reasonable to implement these ideas in terms of profit for the company.
They just do not know how to assess the effectiveness of marketing decisions.
This is a really relevant problem for both Russia and foreign companies.
If we recall the marketing mix and the 4P or 5-7P that we considered in the general marketing module,
we need to add the following.
The most important P in marketing is profitability.
And every company should understand that marketing is not the goal itself,
it is a tool for increasing the company's profits and improving the results of its activities.
Now, after we are sure that the control of marketing activities is really necessary for any company,
we will move on to the first section of our lectures
and consider what place control takes in terms of marketing.
Pay attention to the slide.
You see that any marketing plan starts with control and ends with control.
At the beginning, the company sets a summary of the control indicators of its activity,
which it will use at the end of the marketing plan to implement control.
Have the goals that were set by the company at the beginning been achieved?
Do the real results correspond to the desired results?
Thus, control is an integral part of the marketing activity of any company.
Let's consider the model of the chain of marketing effectiveness.
The essence of this model is as follows.
Each company has its own strategy.
There is a set of functional strategies that you have already studied.
But the implementation of any strategy involves certain tactical actions of the company.
In the slide, you can see how the strategy block is being used to implement the tactical actions of the company.
It is easy to assume that any tactical actions,
be it the implementation of an advertising campaign or the development of a new product,
involve certain costs.
By investing money in these tactical actions,
the company assumes that it will get a significant result.
Namely, the increase in profits, for example,
or the change in other indicators of the company's activity.
What actions can take place?
In the slide, you can see that tactical actions can affect the internal and external environment of the company in a certain way.
First, they influence the buyers.
For example, they change their attitude to the product or change the behavior of the buyer.
Secondly, these actions influence the market.
Thirdly, they influence the financial indicators of the company's activity.
For example, the level of profit the company receives.
When the company invests money in certain tactical actions,
the company assumes that it will get certain results.
The results can be as follows.
In the right part of the slide, you can see a list of possible results.
On the one hand, they can reflect the change in the company's position in the market.
For example, the share of the company's market can increase.
Secondly, these actions can increase the company's market capital
and increase the value of the company's relationship with the consumers.
And finally, the company's profit or share price can change.
Here we can see that on one side of the scale there are the company's costs for the tactical actions,
the conditioned strategies,
and on the other side there is the result expressed in the aspects related to the finances,
the market and the consumers.
If we compare what we have invested and what we have received,
we can evaluate how effective our marketing activity is.
Any company has an idea of the size of its marketing budget.
But how can we evaluate the results related to the consumers, the market and the financial indicators?
In order to quantify the aspects related to the consumers, the market and the financial indicators of the company's activities,
there are so-called marketing metrics.
What are marketing metrics?
Metrics are a system of quantitative indicators that can be used in any discipline.
Marketing also has its own set of metrics.
It is the marketing metrics that allow us to quantify the aspects related to the consumers,
the market and the financial indicators of the company's activities.
If we could not quantify the results of our marketing activities,
we would not be able to draw a conclusion about the effectiveness of our marketing.
Pay attention to the slide.
Here you can see the classification of marketing metrics.
All marketing metrics can be divided into several groups.
In the center you can see the most important marketing metrics,
those related to the market and our consumers.
In addition, each marketing activity has its own metrics.
Sales management has its own metrics.
Advertising management also has its own marketing metrics.
Today we will look at all these quantitative indicators in order to learn how to calculate them.
Let's start with the metrics related to the market.
The first and probably the most frequently used metric, which is known to almost everyone, is the market share.
It would seem that it is not difficult to measure the share of the company's market.
You just need to evaluate the volume of our product sales
by the volume of our product sales plus the volume of the competitors' products.
But there are some tricky things.
First, we need to understand what we mean by the market in this case.
Where are the boundaries of the total volume of product sales?
What do we mean by the products and who should we consider as competitors?
How to correctly define the boundaries of the market?
Pay attention to the slide.
Here is an example of a certain market.
The key words are as follows.
The market is a sports shoe.
We are talking about the product we are considering.
We are not just considering the whole shoe, but the sports shoe.
The shoes for children from 2 to 16 years old.
We limit our market to children's shoes.
The next important aspect is the shoes for middle and high income buyers.
Again, we define the boundaries of our market
to better define who are our competitors.
The next factor is geographical.
We define the region of interest to the market.
It is impossible to define the market share by defining the region.
Having defined the boundaries of the market,
we need to decide how to measure the market share.
We can measure the market share from the point of view of the volume of sales in the monetary expression.
We can also measure the market share from the point of view of the volume of sales in the natural expression,
that is, in the units of the product.
Which option to choose?
What is better?
Is it better to evaluate the market share in terms of the monetary units
than in the natural expression or vice versa?
In different situations, we need different assessments.
What are the advantages and disadvantages?
Let's consider.
If we consider the market share, taking into account the volume of sales in the monetary expression,
then the change in the market share can be caused by, for example,
such a factor as the change in the price of the product.
Here we cannot understand how the number of transactions with our products or with the products of competitors has changed.
Using the market share calculated from the volume of sales in the natural expression,
we can clearly understand that here we have taken into account only specific transactions and specific purchased goods.
Here, the price increase or, on the contrary, the price decrease does not play any role.
Now the next metric.
The relative market share.
What is the difference between the relative market share and the relative market share?
When we consider the relative market share,
we consider the volume of sales of not all the goods on our market,
but only the volume of sales of our main competitor, if there is such a thing.
Knowing the relative market share, we can understand
how effective our activity is compared to the activity of our competitor.
Accordingly, if the relative market share is more than 100%,
it means that our volume of sales exceeds the volume of sales of the competitor.
If it is less than 100%, then we lag behind and it is necessary to take any action.
Pay attention to the next slide.
Here you see the matrix of the Boston Consulting Group.
Here all the goods of the company are divided into some categories.
As you can see, they are divided according to the criteria of the market potential and the relative market share.
These are the indicators that we have just considered.
The next metric that needs to be studied is the market concentration index.
Different markets have different concentrations.
In some markets there are many small players,
in other markets there are large companies.
For each company it is necessary to understand the market it operates in,
what is the concentration on it.
To calculate the concentration index,
we need to add up the market share of several players.
Usually, it is 3 or 4 companies.
These are companies with the largest market share.
Now let's discuss the answer.
In our task, the concentration index of the market is 55%.
This is not a very high indicator, but not very low.
This means that there are several fairly serious players in the market,
and the company must take this into account in its activities.
The next metric related to the market is the brand development index.
How do we calculate the brand development index?
We take the sales volume of our brand to the consumers of a certain group.
For example, we choose a group of consumers, state institutions,
and calculate the brand development index in this category of consumers, in this segment.
To do this, we divide the sales volume of our goods to this group of buyers
into the total sales volume of our brand.
What does the brand development index tell us about a certain segment of buyers?
By comparing the brand development index in different segments of buyers,
we can understand which of these segments is stronger or weaker.
What does it mean?
Which segment consumes our goods or services to a greater extent, and which to a lesser extent?
The correct answer to this problem is the brand development index
in the state institution segment is 1.32.
What does this mean?
If we assume that the average segment among all the segments of our consumers
has a development index of 1,
then this segment of the state institution consumes our goods more actively.
This is one of the main segments.
If a company has a segment of consumers with the highest brand development index,
it means that these are the main consumers of the company,
and they should be given maximum attention.
In some cases, knowing the brand development index in different segments,
companies become niche.
They switch all their efforts to this particular segment and work only with this segment.
All other segments are secondary for them.
This is one of the possible strategies of a company.
The next metric is related to the market.
It is the coefficient of the brand penetration into the market.
This metric is calculated as follows.
We take the number of buyers who buy our goods
and divide it by the total number of potential buyers in the market.
Thus, we can understand how actively our goods are used.
The correct answer to this problem is
that the coefficient of the brand penetration into the market is 2.5%.
This is a small number.
It means that only 2.5% of potential buyers buy our goods.
In this case, a company should either increase the awareness of its buyers,
or change their attitude to our goods,
that is, to cover more and more buyers.
There are cases when the coefficient of the brand penetration into the market is very high,
and it is close to 100%.
What should a company do in this situation to increase the volume of sales?
In this case, there is no one else to attract.
All buyers or almost everyone buys our goods.
In this case, a company should choose another strategy.
It is possible to encourage buyers to buy our goods more often
or to buy our goods in a larger volume.
Thus, we see that a company needs to know the coefficient of the brand penetration into the market
or a certain product into the market
to understand what actions to take to improve the performance of its activities.
The next metric related to the market is called a share of the wallet.
What does it mean?
Imagine a buyer who goes to the store every day and buys goods of a certain category.
Let's choose a certain product category.
Let's say it's dairy products.
Our buyer buys dairy products of various brands.
If we take all the total costs of the buyer for dairy products in the denominator,
and there will be costs for dairy products of our brand,
we will calculate the cost of all the brands of this buyer.
If the share of the wallet is high, the buyer buys goods of our brand only.
Maybe he rarely buys goods of other brands.
I mean goods of a certain category.
In this case, what can we do?
We can only encourage him to buy goods in a larger volume.
We have no reason to lure this buyer to competitors,
because he does not buy goods of competitors.
If the share of the wallet is not high,
it means that the buyer buys both our goods of this category
and goods of competitors.
In this case, our primary task is to switch the buyer
from buying goods of competitors to buying goods of our brand.
We see that depending on the value of the share of the wallet,
we can take various actions to improve the performance of our activity.
Now, having considered the main metrics related to the market,
we move on to metrics related to consumers.
On the slide, you can see the so-called hierarchy of effects.
The chain of awareness, attitude, behavior.
This is a chain that the buyer needs to go through to make a purchase.
Why do we need to consider this chain?
It would seem that if we are interested in a deal,
if we are interested in buying goods,
why do we need to consider awareness and attitude?
There are very serious arguments here.
If a situation arises when the volume of sales is not high or not high enough,
because any company's sales volume is not always high enough,
and you always want more,
then you need to understand the reason why the buyer refuses to buy our goods.
The reasons can be different.
These reasons can be identified by analyzing the behavior of the buyer at different stages.
Let's say, the buyer may not buy our goods,
because he does not know about the existence of our brand.
That is, awareness of our product is low.
Here we need to take certain actions,
for example, increase our advertising budget.
There are situations when the buyer refuses to buy for other reasons.
When the awareness is high,
but the attitude of the buyer to the product is not good enough,
and therefore the buyer refuses to buy.
Knowing that the problem is in the attitude,
we will adopt completely different strategies
than in the case when we know that the problem is in awareness.
If we talk about measuring awareness,
we need to understand that this is a metric,
which means that we measure awareness quantitatively.
How to measure awareness quantitatively?
First of all, you need to identify several types of awareness.
Spontaneous awareness means that
when the question is asked about the goods of a certain category,
the buyer without a hint calls our brand or the name of our company.
And the next type of awareness is allocated,
the so-called Top of Mind indicator.
What does it mean?
This indicator can be translated as the first in the list,
or what comes to mind first.
Here the survey is conducted as follows.
When the question is asked,
what brands of goods of a certain category do you know?
And the brand that he calls first,
or the brand that he calls first,
is called Top of Mind.
This indicator reflects the percentage of buyers
who named our brand or the name of our company
as the first in the list of brands or goods of a certain category.
How to measure the quantitatively?
This is the percentage of buyers who named our brand or the name of our company
without a hint.
Not necessarily the first in the list.
And how to measure the quantitatively?
In this case, when the buyer receives a list of companies
and marks the brands that he knows,
we record the percentage of buyers who know our product
based on the list they have.
Next.
The most difficult thing is to measure the quantitatively.
It would seem paradoxical.
How to measure the quantitatively?
Here, the marketers have found a solution.
Of course, the quantitatively is measured
by conducting a marketing survey of the buyers.
To measure the quantitatively, it is not enough to measure it in general.
Because there is no clear understanding of what the quantitatively is.
One buyer will say that he has a good relationship,
another will say that it is not good enough.
But this information will not give us anything.
We will not be able to understand the essence of the relationship
between our buyer and our brand or our product.
Therefore, the marketers have divided the concept of the relationship
into several characteristics.
The first is the image.
How to measure the quantitatively?
In the survey, the buyers are offered to evaluate a number of statements on a scale.
Usually, this scale is 5 or 7.
1 means that the buyer does not agree with the statement at all.
5 or 7 means that the buyer absolutely agrees with the statement.
What statements can be given about the image?
For example, the statement is given.
I believe that the image of this brand corresponds to my way of life.
Or, for example, I believe that the image of this brand suggests
that these products are purchased by people of mature age.
And the buyer evaluates whether he agrees with this or not.
And having quantitative assessments of the agreement or disagreement
with this statement of potential buyers,
we can draw a conclusion about what, in the opinion of consumers,
the image of our product is.
The next aspect of the relationship is the price-quality ratio.
Companies and consumers may have completely different opinions
about the price-quality ratio.
Almost all companies believe that they have adequate prices
and very high quality.
But the buyers may disagree with this for various reasons.
Because they do not know enough about the quality of the goods.
Because they have a biased opinion.
Or, in general, the attitude to the product does not allow them
to say that the product has high quality.
That is, some external factors affect their opinion.
Nevertheless, we need to evaluate how the buyers perceive
the price-quality ratio.
And this perception is always subjective.
How to do this?
How to get quantitative assessments?
In this case, again, there are surveys of potential buyers.
They are offered the same 5 or 7-point scale
from completely disagreeable to completely agreeable.
But here such statements are offered.
One of the most common statements used in this case
is that the goods of a given brand have an adequate price-quality ratio.
And here our buyer will either agree with this or disagree.
Another option is to say that the goods of a given brand
have a higher quality than the corresponding price.
The next aspect of the quantitative attitude is the perceived quality.
Here, too, the buyer is offered a scale from completely low quality
to extremely high quality.
And we get quantitative assessments of the perceived quality of our product.
Many companies are surprised when they find out
that the perceived quality of their goods or services
is significantly different from the perceived quality of their products.
Often, the buyer does not have enough information about the quality.
Therefore, it is important to measure the perceived quality,
not the real one, whatever it is.
The next indicator that is measured
during the study of the buyer's attitude to goods or brands
is the intention.
Here, the most various intentions are studied,
that is, the characteristics of the behavior of the buyer.
And also, a scale is used from completely disagreeable to completely agreeable
to assess various statements.
Here, the statements are associated with the actions
that the buyer intends or does not intend to make.
These can be completely different statements.
For example, I plan to refuse to purchase a product of your brand.
Here, the buyer assesses whether he agrees with this statement,
that he plans to refuse or does not agree, that he does not plan to.
There can be more complex statements.
For example, if I find that there is no product available in the store
of the research brand,
then I will not purchase a product of the competing brand.
Accordingly, the buyer notes whether he agrees with this statement or not.
Here, the most various intentions of the buyer can be studied,
depending on what interests us at the moment,
or what aspects of our activity are relevant at the moment.
And the last aspect,
related to the buyer's attitude to goods,
is the intention to buy.
Here, a simple scale is used,
from absolutely agreeable to completely agreeable.
And, accordingly, the intermediate values.
Here, we can find out what percentage of buyers
may or may not buy our product.
Then we will talk about the intention to buy,
and see how this metric can be used to assess the potential volume of sales.
The next metric, related to the consumer,
is the consumer satisfaction.
The consumer satisfaction can also be estimated quantitatively.
In the slide, you can see an example
of how the consumer satisfaction was estimated quantitatively during the study.
What conclusions can we draw from this assessment?
Here, you can see that 50% of consumers are satisfied with goods or services
studied in this case.
But we see that the extremely satisfied buyers are twice as few.
Well, and extremely unsatisfied are very few.
Accordingly, knowing the ratio of the group of buyers
with high satisfaction or low,
we can draw the appropriate conclusions about our further actions.
It rarely happens, or rather, it never happens,
that all buyers are extremely satisfied with goods or services.
But the satisfaction of the buyer can be managed.
How?
First of all, by managing expectations.
If a company creates high expectations about its goods or services,
then the buyers are not very pleased with their real performance of goods or services.
It turns out that we are to blame for the reduction of satisfaction.
If we do not increase the expectations of the buyers,
it may turn out that the buyers will say that they are more satisfied
with what they received, because they did not expect such a high level of service.
For example, they did not expect that the goods would be of such high quality.
The next metric used to study consumers is the desire to recommend.
It is quite simple.
During the survey of buyers, we determine
what percentage of buyers are ready to recommend our goods to the representatives of their reference group,
for example, to their friends or acquaintances.
The next metric is more complex — the desire to search.
It means that there are buyers who will not purchase the goods of the competitor
without discovering that our goods are available.
In this case, we will call them the ones who want to search.
Having determined the percentage of buyers who want to search for our goods,
regardless of whether they are in the store or not,
and will not buy the goods of another brand,
this percentage is called the desire to search.
The next metric related to buyers is the coefficient of retention of consumers.
This is not such a simple coefficient.
To calculate it, we need to know how many consumers we were able to retain,
that is, to keep them as customers among those we could lose.
It is not so easy to determine how many buyers we could lose during a certain period.
If we use the contract system of relations,
we can assume that if a contract with our company is signed with a buyer at the moment,
and it does not expire in the near future,
that is, it expires beyond the limits of the period we are considering,
we can say that this buyer is not at risk of loss.
We do not consider him as the one we could lose,
and do not take into account the coefficient of retention of buyers.
We take into account only those who we could lose, but did not lose.
The next metric is the profitability of consumers.
It is not a secret that different buyers bring different levels of profit to the company.
Some of them buy very little or buy only at low prices,
others buy a large number of goods and buy at high prices.
To know how to distribute the efforts to serve and establish a relationship with different consumers,
the company needs to understand the profitability of a particular buyer.
In addition, we consider the so-called consumer value.
The consumer value is the entire flow of money that we will receive from him
during the entire period of interaction with this buyer.
This period can be several decades.
Therefore, if the company at some point wants to take actions that may lead to the loss of a client,
for example, not to agree to a price reduction or to refuse to provide special conditions for a certain client,
the company should remember that there are many years of possible profitable relationships ahead.
In order not to lose this long-term focus,
each company should assess the value of the relationship with each client.
Finally, the next metrics related to the buyer are the cost of retention and the cost of attracting buyers.
There is nothing complicated here, we just assess what costs we need to bear
in order to attract one buyer and what costs are necessary to retain one buyer.
It is no secret that retaining a buyer is much cheaper than attracting a new one.
Sometimes the difference in these costs reaches tens of times.
Nevertheless, most often companies try to attract new clients,
while spending large amounts of money.
They pay less attention to their old clients,
and they can refuse to provide services or goods to the company,
leaving the competition, and many companies do not even notice this,
considering that they do not need old clients, they need to attract as many new ones as possible.
In order for the company not to forget what the costs are for these two types of activities,
for retention and for attraction, it is necessary to calculate them.
We have discussed the main metrics related to the market and buyers.
Now we will discuss the questions related to the profit.
Why are we discussing this question now?
The fact is that the knowledge of profit, retention and margin
will help us to calculate the next, more complex marketing metrics,
which we will discuss later.
So, here our main concepts are margin and retention.
What is the difference?
Margin can be calculated in rubles or other monetary units, as well as in percents.
In rubles, the margin is the difference between the price of a product,
that is, the price per unit of a product, and the cost of the product.
Usually, these are full costs, that is, variable costs plus constant costs.
The margin can be considered in percents,
as the ratio of the margin in monetary units, for example, in rubles,
to the price per unit of the product.
Here it is necessary to distinguish the concept of margin and retention.
If we say that the margin is measured in percents,
the retention is also in percents,
we cannot say that it is the same thing, it is not the same thing at all.
What is the difference?
The margin is the percentage of the price of a product,
that is, of the entire price value,
and the retention is the percentage of the costs.
To calculate the retention,
we need to multiply the percentage of the retention by the costs.
To calculate the margin,
we need to multiply the percentage of the margin by the cost of the product,
and this will result in different quantities.
And finally, what is the retention?
Retention is the difference between the price of a product and the variable costs.
Knowing the retention, we can calculate the margin for the variable costs,
as the ratio of the retention to the price per unit of the product.
Now let's do the following task.
In the workbook, you are offered to calculate the margin and retention
using a certain example.
Let's look at such a metric as marketing costs.
Any company should understand what its marketing costs are
and be sure to take them into account.
But the knowledge of marketing costs in units of money
does not always give the right answer.
You can't compare the marketing costs of other companies,
because they may depend on the scale of the activity.
And for this, companies often calculate the marketing costs
as a percentage of the sales volume.
In many industries, there are some common standards
about the average marketing costs of companies in this industry.
And knowing this standard,
you can calculate the marketing costs
of companies in this industry.
Knowing this average level,
a company can compare its own indicator with the average
and understand whether it spends more or less.
And if it spends more, is it justified?
And why does it do it?
That is, to make a conscious decision to spend more on marketing than competitors.
Now let's move on to the next important indicator.
This is the target sales volume.
What is the target sales volume? Why calculate it?
What are the main goals for profit?
And to achieve a certain profit,
you need to understand the sales volume
that a company needs to achieve this profit.
That is, what is the minimum sales volume
that we need to achieve to get the desired profit.
Pay attention to the formula.
Here we use the following quantities.
Constant company costs, target profit and return.
You remember that the return is the difference
between the price of the product and the variable costs
for the production of this product.
Knowing these four quantities,
a company can calculate
what sales volume it needs to achieve
to get the desired profit at this price level
and at this level of costs.
Complete the task in the workbook
and calculate what sales volume a company needs to achieve
to get the desired profit.
How to calculate the sales volume?
Now let's move on to the next block of metrics.
These are metrics related to sales management.
Let's divide the metrics related to sales management
into two groups.
Those metrics that are related to management
of household staff, that is, sales managers.
They can be called differently.
They are people who deal with personal sales in the company.
The second group of metrics is related to distribution channels.
When we use not personal sales, but intermediaries.
First, let's consider metrics related to personal sales,
that is, management of household staff.
You can see on the slide that there are at least four options
for calculating the efficiency coefficient of household staff.
It's a good idea to choose one of these options
and use it in your work.
Many companies do it.
They choose a coefficient and use it
to compare different employees
to study the results of their work.
To set rewards for certain employees
or to set sales goals.
But it's not that simple.
Any company should use several efficiency coefficients
of household staff.
It helps to understand what the problems are
if we don't reach the desired sales level.
Let's consider this problem as an example.
Solve the problem from a workbook
that describes the activities of two managers
of Vasily Stepan.
Then we'll discuss the results
and what recommendations you can give to the company
when working with this staff.
So, what conclusions can we draw?
We can see that Vasily's sales manager
has a rather low sales volume
for the number of contacts.
What does it mean?
It means that this manager lacks
the skills of personal sales
and the skills of making deals.
He makes a lot of efforts to sell the product,
but it doesn't work out.
So, we can make a decision
to offer the manager additional training opportunities
and send him to a personal sales training
or offer other options to improve his skills.
Now let's compare Vasily's results
with Stepan's.
We can see that Stepan's manager
has a rather high sales volume for each contact.
But his sales level is almost the same.
What is Stepan's problem?
Maybe he makes insufficient efforts
to carry out his household activities.
He simply doesn't spend much time on sales.
What is the reason?
We need to understand the reason
of Stepan's behavior.
In this case, personal sales training won't help him.
He already knows how to make deals.
He just doesn't actively contact the customer.
What can we do here?
What are the options?
First of all, it's possible that Stepan
doesn't have enough motivation to work actively.
In this case, we need to think about his reward
and maybe offer additional motivating factors.
The second option, which is also common,
is that this manager doesn't have enough time
to establish contact with potential customers.
He is overloaded with other work,
for example, filling documents,
collecting information about sales,
and other responsibilities,
which prevent him from fully
carrying out sales and contacting customers.
We can see that in these two examples,
in the case of Vasiliy and Stepan,
we need different strategies.
The different efficiency coefficients
from the household staff helped us to understand
what we should do.
The next important quantitative indicators
are the costs for one deal.
To calculate the costs for one deal,
we need to divide the total cost
for the household activity of the company
into the number of deals
or the number of sold goods.
Why do we need to take into account
the costs for one deal?
It often happens that the costs for one deal
of a certain sales manager are quite high.
What can it be connected with?
It can be connected with the fact that
this manager cannot distinguish
a prospective customer from a non-prospective one,
and thus spends his time and resources
on him.
There are situations when the sales manager
gives too many samples of the product
to everyone who wants it,
and not necessarily to those who really
plan to purchase the product.
In this case, the costs for one deal
can also increase.
Therefore, each company should control
the costs for each deal in general
and the costs for each deal
of each particular employee
who sells goods or services to the company.
The next indicator that each company
should calculate is the amount of
the household staff that is not lost.
This is the number of sales managers
that the company can afford
to maximize
so that its activity does not become lost.
The calculated amount of the household staff
that is not lost
allows us to achieve
a non-negative profit.
In order to achieve a positive profit,
the number of household staff
should be less than the calculated amount
of the household staff that is not lost.
Let's consider a task from a workbook
that requires us to calculate
the maximum number of sales managers
that can afford to lose
so that their profit is not negative.
After we have considered
the main quantitative indicators
related to the management of household staff
that deals with personal sales in the company,
we move on to the consideration of those metrics
that are used in the management
of distribution channels.
In other words, in those situations
we need to consider
the number of sales managers
that can afford to lose
so that their profit is not negative.
The first indicator is the distribution coverage.
In order to calculate the distribution coverage,
we need to divide the number of sales managers
that sell our product
or the products of our brand
into the total number of sales managers
working in the area
that is being studied.
It is impossible to say
that the distribution coverage
should be the highest
or vice versa the lowest.
Why?
Because the distribution coverage
should correspond to our sales strategy.
If we say that we are making
an intensive sales,
then, of course,
the distribution coverage
should be large.
That is, a large number of sales managers
should offer our product to the buyers.
If we find that
with an intensive sales coverage
the distribution coverage
is large enough,
then we need to attract
more sales managers.
If, on the contrary,
we say that we have an exclusive sales,
but we find that
the distribution coverage
is large enough,
that many companies
sell our product,
then this sales cannot be called exclusive.
And here we also need to make adjustments.
The next indicator
that we should calculate
for the distribution channels,
that is, for the use of intermediaries,
is the share of the shelf.
What is the share of the shelf?
This is the ratio of the number of places
belonging to our products on the shelf,
for example, a supermarket or a hypermarket,
to the total number of places on the shelf.
I mean the shelf
dedicated to the products
of a certain product category.
Why is this important?
We can say that the share of the shelf
is, in a sense, the share of the market.
If we consider the shelf
as a market,
because the buyer,
who is in the store,
chooses from the products
that he sees on the shelf of the supermarket.
Thus, the more places on the shelf
belong to us,
that is, the higher the share of the shelf,
this indicator that we calculate,
the higher the probability
that the buyer will buy our product.
To increase the share of the shelf,
many companies
resort to various tricks.
One of the strategies
is to create new trading brands.
If a company has several brands,
it will take up more space
on the shelves of the supermarket
than if the company
had only one brand.
Thus, the probability
that the buyer will buy
our product increases.
Another option
is to create
a modification of the product.
Let's say, when a company
offers several modifications
of a product under one brand,
the share of the shelf
is usually higher.
The third factor
that we study
is the absence of the product
in the warehouse.
It is sometimes called
out of stock.
This is the ratio
of the number of intermediaries
who do not have our product
at a certain time,
at the moment of measurement.
It is sold there,
we work with this intermediary,
and the ratio of the number of intermediaries
is the total number
of intermediaries
we work with.
This factor can also be a source
of possible problems.
If we find that
the absence of the product
in the warehouse is high,
we need to improve
the system of our product movement,
to ensure that the product
is always available.
If, for example, we find
that the distribution coverage is low,
we need to improve
the system of our product movement.
We see that
using these metrics,
calculating these quantitative indicators,
the company can diagnose
the reason for their problems
with sales and sales.
Now we move on
to the next group of marketing metrics
that are related to the product policy of the company.
Now we will talk
about the development of new products.
When a company develops a new product
and offers it to its buyers,
it is necessary to calculate
the coefficient of trial purchases
and the coefficient of repeated purchases.
In the slide you can see
how these coefficients are calculated.
To calculate the coefficient of trial purchases,
we need to divide the number of buyers
who tried the product
by the total number of potential buyers.
The coefficient of repeated purchases
is the ratio of the number of buyers
who bought our product again
to all those who tried it.
Please note that
the coefficient of repeated purchases
is the ratio of the number of buyers
who tried the product
and not all potential buyers.
As a rule,
these coefficients are calculated
by the results of marketing research.
A survey is conducted
to determine
whether potential buyers
intend to buy a certain product
and the percentage of buyers
who buy it
is determined
by the coefficient of repeated purchases.
Now let's look at the next diagram.
In this case,
we will analyze
how the coefficient of repeated purchases
and the information
about possible trial purchases
can help us
determine the predicted volume of sales.
Let's imagine
that we conducted a marketing research,
surveyed potential buyers
and asked them
to name a certain product
and to name a certain product.
The product is shown in the form of a sample
or described in detail
by its main characteristics.
Let's imagine
that we had a 5-point rating scale
and the upper values of this scale
4 and 5
meant that
the buyer will probably buy our product
or the buyer will definitely buy our product,
that is, most likely to buy.
The lower values
are the ones
that are not shown
in the scale.
We take all those buyers
in the percentage
of the total number of respondents
who will probably buy our product
and who will definitely buy,
that is, will definitely buy our product
and calculate what percentage
they make up
of the total number of respondents.
And this value
can be considered
as the coefficient of trial purchases.
That is, this is the number of buyers,
the share of buyers
who will buy our new product.
We cannot use this value
to calculate
the total sales volume
directly.
Why?
Because not all potential buyers
are aware of our product.
And you remember that we calculated
the coefficient of awareness,
that is, the percentage of potential buyers
who know about the existence of our product.
And in order to determine
how many people
will buy our product,
we need
all those people
who would buy the product,
probably bought
or definitely bought
under the conditions of knowing
this product,
under the conditions of awareness,
multiply by the coefficient of awareness,
that is, remove from this number of buyers
all those who do not know
about our product at the moment.
And only in this way
we can determine the predicted
volume of trial purchases.
We can multiply
the volume of trial purchases
by this coefficient
and get the estimated number
of repeated purchases.
We assume that when a buyer tries to buy,
he buys one unit of the product,
but when he tries to buy again,
he can buy more units of the product
for one purchase.
Thus, we need the number of buyers
who plan to make a second purchase
multiplied by the number of units of the product
that they plan to buy on average,
and then multiply by the frequency
of the transaction.
When we talk about trial purchases,
we assume that a trial purchase
is made once,
and any subsequent one
will be considered as a second one.
When we talk about second purchases,
then in the following period of time
a buyer can make several
second purchases.
Therefore, knowing the estimated
number of buyers who should make
a second purchase
and knowing how many units of the product
they will buy,
we must multiply this number
by the estimated frequency
of the purchase.
Only after this,
we will be able to get the estimated
number of repeated purchases.
Pay attention to the diagram.
You see that
the total estimated volume of sales
consists of the estimated volume
of trial purchases
and the estimated volume of repeated purchases.
Knowing the coefficients of trial purchases
and the coefficients of repeated purchases,
we can calculate
the estimated volume of sales.
Now, do the task from the workbook.
Calculate the estimated volume of sales
for a certain new product.
Now, let's move on to the next metric
within the framework of the company's
product policy.
This metric is associated with the concept
of commodity cannibalism.
This situation occurs when
a new product appears in the company.
And inevitably, this new product
eats up part of the volume of sales
of the old product.
To determine which part of the volume of sales
of the old product will be eaten up
by a new product,
we use the coefficient of cannibalization.
We divide the lost sales,
that is, the sales that we lost
as a result of the introduction
of a new product into the market
of a new product into the market,
that is, the sale of an old product,
into the volume of sales of a new product.
And what does this coefficient of cannibalization
allow us to understand?
It shows us whether it is reasonable
from the point of view of the volume of sales
and profits
of introducing a new product into the market.
If the coefficient of cannibalization
is less than 100%,
it turns out that we have lost
the volume of sales less than we received
due to the introduction of a new product
into the market.
There are situations when
the coefficient of cannibalization
is 100%.
This means that a new product
has completely replaced an old product.
And here the change in the profit of the company
depends on the margin
of a new and old product.
If the margin of a new product is greater,
then the profit of the company will increase.
There are situations when
the coefficient of cannibalization
exceeds 100%.
What does this mean?
The amount of new products
has decreased to a greater extent
than the volume of sales of new products.
What can this be connected with?
Usually, this happens in cases
when buyers,
having seen that a new product
has appeared,
improved, modified,
more attractive,
refuse to purchase an old product,
but at the same time
they have not yet purchased a new one,
either because they do not have enough money
to purchase it,
but because they have not yet
purchased a new product.
In this case, the coefficient of cannibalization
exceeds 100%.
This can be dangerous for the company.
It turns out that it has lost
an old product,
and the new product has not yet
started to work in the market.
Now let's complete the task
from the workbook
and calculate the coefficient of cannibalization
for a certain new product.
The cost of the new product
Now we move on
to a very important question.
The metric is called
the market capital.
The market capital is considered
to be the main non-material asset
of the company.
Due to the market capital,
the company can get
a large amount of additional profit.
In fact, the market capital
is the additional profit,
that is, it is the increase in profit
of the company
due to the ownership of a certain brand.
If we take a situation
when a company sells a certain product
under its own brand,
and take another situation
when a company sells a similar product,
but without this brand,
and compare the profit obtained
in the first and second cases,
we can understand
what part of the profit,
what amount
the company gets
due to the brand.
The larger the market capital,
the greater the additional profit
the company can get
due to its own brand.
Many researchers
proposed different algorithms
and methods of calculating the market capital.
Let's take a look at several of these methods.
The first method
was proposed by the advertising agency
Young and Rubicon.
Here you can see
the four indicators
that measure the market capital.
That is, the perceived difference
between the brand's life,
brand's respect and brand's knowledge.
If we compare
our brand
with the brand of a competitor
and give certain assessments
regarding the brand's respect
and brand's knowledge,
our brand's knowledge
and the brand's knowledge of the competitor,
it is better to do these measurements
not with the help of employees,
but using the opinion of consumers.
By comparing the assessments
on these four indicators,
the company can understand
the market capital of which brand
is higher than our brand
or the brand of the competitor
and make the appropriate conclusions.
The next method is similar.
You can see that it differs
only by two characteristics
according to which the market capital is assessed.
The first is the attractiveness of the brand,
that is, the degree
to which the buyers want to buy the product,
how attractive it is for them,
and the trust in the brand.
The same algorithm
is used by the company
to conduct a survey of the buyers
in order to determine
which brand
or brand of the competitor
has more market capital.
It is impossible to say
that there are brands
that have high indicators
according to all these characteristics.
This probably does not happen.
There are some trends.
Research shows that
brands that have existed for a long time
receive higher grades
in terms of uniqueness
and relevance in the lifestyle of the buyers.
More modern new brands
receive high grades
in terms of uniqueness and relevance,
but low grades
in terms of knowledge and respect,
because they have existed on the market
not so long ago.
The next method
is the so-called Morin method.
Here we get
a more quantitative assessment.
Here we can compare
the market capital of our brand
and the brand of competitors
not only on a regular scale,
that is, we can say not only
which brand has higher
or lower market capital,
but we can also compare
how much higher
and how much lower.
You see the formula.
The market capital is the sum of the market share
relative price and loyalty index.
Relative price.
What is it?
It is the percentage
of the price of our product,
the product of our brand,
higher than the price
of the product of the competitor's brand.
And we see the following logic here.
The higher the market share,
the higher the brand capital.
And this is quite logical.
If the product has a higher market share,
then, apparently,
this brand is attractive for buyers
and, perhaps, the brand capital
is really higher.
The second aspect is the relative price.
Here we see the following logic.
Indeed,
if the price of our product,
the product of our brand,
is higher than the price of the competitor's product,
and we really sell the product
at this price and still exist,
then, apparently,
there are some objective reasons
why buyers pay more for our product.
Therefore, we have more market capital.
And the next component of this formula
is the loyalty index.
The loyalty index
is the percentage of buyers
who stated during the poll
that they plan to purchase our product,
to continue purchasing
our brand's product next year.
Here we see the following logic.
The more loyal buyers we have,
the higher the market capital.
And now,
do the task from the workbook.
Compare the market capital
of your brand
and the brand of the competitor
you have chosen for analysis
and draw a conclusion
whose market capital is higher.
The next step is to make a decision.
The decision is made
based on the market capital
of the competitor.
Now we move on
to the next group of marketing metrics
related to price management.
The first indicator
that we need to consider
is the price premium.
This is the ratio
of the difference between the price of our product
and the price of the competitor's product
to the price of the competitor's product.
Knowing the price premium,
we can understand
how much our product is more expensive
than the competitor's product.
Despite the price premium,
it can have a negative meaning.
That is,
we need to measure the price premium
at all stages of product distribution.
That is, at the level of the manufacturer's price,
at the level of the wholesale price
and at the level of the retail price.
By calculating the price premium
of our products regularly,
we can see
the price premium of our products
relative to the competitors'.
There are situations
when the price premium
at the level of the manufacturer
has the same value
and at the level of the wholesale price
has a completely different value.
Here we can see
how the power distribution changes.
The next indicator
that we need to consider
is the so-called reserve price.
What is a reserve price?
A reserve price is the price
at which our product is sold.
You can see it
on the slide of the chart
where the reserve price is located.
There is also an indicator
of the maximum willingness to buy.
This is the volume of sales
that we have
at a price equal to zero.
Someone may say
that if the price of our product is zero,
then all our products will be taken away.
This is not always the case.
Here we can say
that if the price is zero,
then we will not sell our products,
because many buyers
will want to buy our products for free.
But in fact,
the purchasing possibilities
have their own limitations.
Therefore, the volume of sales
at a zero price is not infinite,
but has a certain level.
Pay attention to the chart
where we can see
the maximum willingness to buy.
If we connect the points
of maximum willingness to buy
and the reserve price,
we will get
a linear demand function.
Why do we study the reserve prices?
Knowing the reserve price,
the variable cost per unit of the product,
we can easily calculate
the optimal price of our product.
It would seem
that this is not too simple.
First, we need to make sure
that the optimal price
has a certain level of demand.
If we calculate the optimal price
of our product,
we can calculate
the optimal price
that maximizes the profit of the company
according to this formula.
Let's check
whether this is true.
On the slide you will see a table
where various price options
for products from 0 to 5 are presented,
the corresponding volume of sales,
the variable costs,
which in all cases are the same,
and the maximum willingness to buy.
You are offered to calculate
the difference between the price
and the variable costs
and calculate the total return.
After we fill in
all the empty cells in this table,
we will be able to find
what price maximizes
the total return,
in fact, our profit.
Let's try to calculate it
using the formula.
So, our reserve price
is 0.5.
is 5.
When the price is 5,
the volume of sales is 0.
The variable cost per unit of the product
according to our table
is 1.
That is, 5 plus 1 is 6,
divide by 2,
and according to the formula,
our optimal price
with a linear demand function
should be 3.
Let's check
whether this is true.
We calculated the return
in each case,
and then calculated the total return,
multiplying the return
from the unit of the product
by the volume of sales.
And we got that
in case when the price is 3 rubles,
the total return will be maximum,
it will be 4.
That is, it turns out
that this formula really allows us
to calculate the optimal price
in terms of profit maximization.
Now let's consider
the next important indicator,
that is, the elasticity of demand for the price.
The elasticity of demand for the price
is calculated as
the ratio of the change in the volume of sales
to the change in the price.
What does elasticity mean?
The meaning of the elasticity indicator
is that it helps us to determine
how many percent
the volume of sales will change
when the price changes by 1%.
For example,
if our elasticity of demand for the price
is equal to minus 5,
it means that
when the price increases by 1%,
our volume of sales
decreases by 5%.
Why does it decrease?
Because the indicator is equal to minus 5.
The minus sign means
that we have a connection
between the price and the demand,
in this case, the opposite.
Now, do the task from the workbook.
The next indicator
that is usually calculated
in price education
is the so-called price cascade.
There are often cases
when the price
that the buyer pays for the product
is seriously different
from the price in the price list,
because there are various discounts.
Discounts for the volume of sales,
discounts for the constant price,
discounts for the change in the price,
discounts for certain payment conditions,
these discounts are especially common
in the industrial market.
And to understand
how much the real price of transactions
differs from the price in the price list,
we calculate the price cascade,
that is, the attitude of the real price
to the price in the price list.
Do the task from the workbook.
Now we move on to the next group of marketing metrics,
these are the metrics for the promotion of a product.
Let's divide the promotion of a product in this case into two parts.
Metrics in the stimulus of sales and metrics in advertising.
First, let's consider the metrics in the stimulus of sales.
Almost every company has carried out at least once
a promotion of a product,
offered discounts to its customers.
But in order to understand the purpose of offering
different discounts in different situations to your customers,
it is necessary to calculate in advance
how much sales volume is needed
to ensure the profitability of our promotion of a product.
That is, how much we should increase the sales volume
so that our profit does not decrease
due to the fact that we offer discounts to our customers.
In the slide you can see the formula.
Knowing the size of the estimated discount
and the marginal profit per unit of the product,
we can calculate how much our sales volume should increase,
to minimize the loss of money
as a result of this promotion,
as a result of the offer of discounts.
Now, complete the task in your notebook.
Now we move on to the metrics related to advertising.
The main metrics used in advertising and media planning
are impression, coverage, frequency and assessment coefficients.
What does it all mean?
Impression is the number of potential contacts
of the target audience with our advertising message.
Coverage is the number of people,
the number of representatives of the target audience
who had the opportunity to see our advertising message
during a certain show.
Pure coverage is the number of representatives of the target audience
who actually saw our advertising message.
The coverage is the number of people who could see it,
but we don't know if they saw it or not.
Pure coverage is the number of people who saw it,
we know it.
This information is obtained during marketing research.
Frequency is the number of times
the representative of the target audience
could see our message on average.
And the more complex metric is the assessment coefficient
or rating point.
The percentage of representatives of the target audience
who had the opportunity to see our advertising message
may seem to be the same as coverage.
The target audience is the same,
and we count who could see our advertising message.
But in case of coverage,
the number of people is the indicator.
In case of rating point,
the indicator is in percentages.
Although it is often indicated without the percentage sign.
If the rating point is 5,
it means that 5% of the target audience
had the opportunity to see our advertising message.
If the coverage is 5,
it means that 5 people
had the opportunity to see our advertising message.
And finally, the Graphical Rating Point.
Sometimes it is simply called GRP.
It is the rating point
accumulated by all the indicators of our advertising message.
To better understand how it is calculated
and what all these indicators mean,
let's look at an example.
So, let's imagine that our target audience is 5 people.
And we had 5 indicators of our advertising message.
You can see in the table
that the pluses mean that
this representative of the target audience
had the opportunity to see our message.
The minuses mean that
he did not have the opportunity to see our advertising message
at the time of this show.
We are calculating the impression.
Try to calculate the impression indicator yourself.
That is, the number of potential contacts of the target audience.
Calculating the impression
and knowing what our target audience is in general,
that is, 100%,
and 100% is 5 people,
we can calculate the rating point
as a percentage of those representatives of the target audience
who could see the message
in relation to the audience of the target audience.
And this percentage
is calculated
by the number of contacts of the target audience.
And this percentage
is calculated
by the number of contacts of the target audience.
And when we calculate all the rating points,
that is, the points for each show,
we can add them up,
and we get the value of the rating point.
Let's see what the answers should be.
You see that for each show we calculated the impression.
That is, how many contacts
of the target audience were there for each show.
If we had 3 impressions,
and the target audience is 5 people,
then this is 60%.
That is, the rating point for the first show is 60%.
And so on.
We calculate and, in the end,
adding up all the rating points for each show,
we get the value of the rating point.
The next indicators used in media planning
are the effective frequency
and effective coverage.
You remember that frequency is the average number of times
that a representative of the target audience
could see our message.
Effective frequency is the number of times
that, in our opinion,
a customer needs to not only see,
but also perceive, understand our message.
In many cases, it is quite obvious
that seeing the message once is not enough.
The customer may not record anything from this message,
and, accordingly, it will not affect
his behavior when making purchases.
That is why, most often,
companies set a certain effective frequency,
that is, the minimum number of times
that the message should be seen
so that something happens in the customer's head,
so that it somehow affects his behavior.
And, having established an effective frequency,
we can calculate effective coverage.
Effective coverage is the number of representatives
of the target audience
who could see our message
and the number of times that the message should be seen.
That is, with an effective frequency.
Look at the table.
You see that here we have the number of representatives
of the target audience
who had the opportunity to see our message
with a certain number of times,
that is, with a certain frequency.
Suppose we establish that
an effective frequency is 3 for us.
Calculate what is the effective coverage in this case.
We see that in this case,
only those who have seen our message
three or more times
get under the effective coverage.
That is, we add up the number of representatives
of the target audience
who saw the message three times,
four times and five times
and get 98,000 people.
This is our effective coverage.
And we see that
the number of people who saw our message
three times, four times and five times
get 98,000 people.
This is our effective coverage.
The following metrics have a more general nature.
They reflect the effectiveness of marketing as a whole.
Surely, many of you have encountered
the indicators of profitability and sales.
This indicator is calculated as
net profit as a percentage of revenue.
Profitability of investments
or return on investment
is also probably familiar to many.
Here we have
the indicators calculated as net profit
as a percentage of our investments.
But there is a specific indicator in marketing.
This is profitability of marketing investments.
It is called RMI.
Here we take the conversion of sales volume
obtained precisely due to marketing activity,
that is, the volume of sales
that would not have been without marketing,
multiply by the return,
and you remember that this is
the difference in price and variable costs,
and subtract from this value
the costs of marketing.
In fact, this is how we calculate
the conversion of our profit
obtained as a result of marketing activity.
And we divide this value by the costs of marketing.
The higher the RMI of the investment in marketing,
the more effective
the marketing activity of the company.
Now, do the task from the workbook.
Calculate the profitability of investment in marketing
according to the proposed condition.
So, having considered the main marketing metrics,
we now have to analyze
how we can use them
for a more complex assessment
of our marketing activity
and for the control of marketing in the company.
The first element of control in marketing
is the control over the implementation of annual plans.
What is the point here?
At the beginning of the marketing plan, as we remember,
companies choose indicators
according to which they will further control
their marketing activity.
And, of course, according to each indicator,
the company sets a certain goal,
which it would like to achieve.
At the stage of control,
we compare the target indicator
and the real one,
the one we have achieved
during a certain period.
The indicators
for which the control is carried out
for the implementation of the plans
are divided into several groups.
First, this is an analysis of the profitability.
These are all indicators
related to the goals for profitability.
Next, the goals for the market share are assessed.
Have we achieved the market share
that was initially set as a goal?
Here we assess both the market share
and the relative market share.
We also assess the level of our marketing costs.
Have they exceeded the limit
that we have set?
And what is the ratio
of the result obtained
in terms of sales
and the cost of the sales?
Another integral part
of the control for the implementation of the annual plans
is monitoring the consumers.
Here all the metrics are considered,
which are related to the consumers
we have talked about.
We set goals for awareness,
for the perception of our product or our brand,
for the attitude of the buyer,
for the retention of the buyer,
and so on.
We also monitor
whether we have achieved
the goals that we had set
at the beginning of our planning.
We also monitor
whether we have achieved something.
We also conduct an analysis of the financial indicators
related to the achievement of the desired level of profit,
level of return,
level of margin.
After the company has determined
whether the real business situation
is in line with the goals,
whether the goals we had set at the beginning
have been achieved,
the next step is the control of profitability.
Here, as a rule,
the main indicators of profitability are calculated,
profitability of sales,
profitability of investments
and profitability of marketing investments.
And finally, if the company sees
that there are some problems
with achieving the goals,
that is,
the sales goals are not achieved,
the market share does not correspond to the desired one,
or the attitude to the product of the consumer
is not what we would like to get,
then we plan to carry out
such a rather large-scale event
as a marketing audit.
This is an independent study
of all the indicators of the company's activities,
which allows us to understand
what are the reasons
for the insufficient achievement of the goals
and what the company needs to change.
The marketing audit
consists of several elements.
We analyze the marketing environment
and the marketing strategy,
we analyze the organization of marketing in the company,
we organize all the systems,
everything related to marketing,
because the roots of our problems
can lie in any of these elements.
The conspectus and the working notebook
offer you a rather detailed plan,
which is offered by foreign researchers
to companies for the purpose of
the marketing audit.
It contains a large number
of marketing aspects,
and if necessary,
you can use this algorithm
to conduct a marketing audit
in your company.
The marketing audit offered
by foreign researchers
is quite complex
and involves a large-scale activity,
which cannot be required of you
in the form of a mandatory task
within the framework of this course.
But the Russian company
offers a simpler methodology,
consisting of a questionnaire
and its decoding.
In the working notebook,
in the conspectus,
you can also find this questionnaire.
I suggest you answer the questions
of this questionnaire,
which is essentially
an instrument of assessing
the effectiveness of marketing in the company
and understand whether the effectiveness
of your marketing is high enough
and whether you have a reason
to think about and conduct
a more detailed audit of your activity.
How to conduct a marketing audit
in a strategic level
Now let's move on
to strategic control.
To conduct control at a strategic level
means to understand
whether the company is moving
in the right direction in general
or there are some conceptual problems
that do not allow it
to be successful.
Strategic control consists of several stages.
To begin with,
we traditionally set the parameters
of our strategy assessment.
I mean the parameters of the strategy assessment,
not the processes we talked about earlier.
After that, the company must ensure
that all the necessary information
for assessment
is collected on a regular basis
in order to have the opportunity
to evaluate this information
and use it for control.
After we have collected information
about our activity
based on the selected parameters,
we can compare
the real and the desired parameters.
And according to the results,
the company makes a decision
about the adjustment.
What situations do we have?
There is a situation
when the planned results
correspond to the real results.
This is probably the simplest situation.
But it is not always like that.
There is a situation
when the real performance
of the company
is higher than the desired performance.
It is higher than the desired performance.
What does it mean?
We have overcompleted our plan?
This is not good.
Why?
It means that we have set
inadequate goals.
We need to reconsider our goals.
Maybe we have deliberately
or unconsciously lowered the bar
and did not reach the results
we could have achieved.
In a situation when
the real performance is worse
than the planned performance,
the company usually
needs to make adjustments.
What does it mean to make adjustments?
There are no obvious solutions.
First of all,
after we get
a negative result,
we see that the implementation of the strategy
did not give us the desired results,
we should pay attention
to the selected parameters
and evaluation indicators.
Maybe we have chosen
the wrong evaluation indicators
and that is why we have
not achieved a good result.
If we have checked our parameters
and decided that they were
adequately selected
in terms of the current market situation,
we should think
if our goals are adequate.
If we confirm that
our goals are relevant
and there is no point in changing them,
we should pay attention
to the strategy.
Maybe the problem
in the implementation of the strategy
is that the strategy was chosen
incorrectly.
Only if we get a confirmation
that the strategy was chosen
correctly and corresponds
to the current situation
in the external and internal
environment of the company,
only after that we make
a decision to adjust
the implementation of processes
and operations in the company.
We should make adjustments
to the evaluation indicators
and the strategy before
the adjustment of operations.
Now, complete the following task
from the workbook.
In conclusion,
I would like to note the following.
First of all,
the control of marketing activities
is certainly not a panacea.
There are many situations
when the control
can only harm the company,
namely, when the control is not carried out correctly.
Let's look at several situations
when the control
can be carried out with some mistakes.
First,
there is a common situation
when the control becomes
not a means of achieving
a certain result,
when the company
carries out the control
only for the sake of
the process of the control.
And often in this situation
the ordinary employees suffer,
who are under constant control.
They do not see why
this control is carried out
and it really does not give anything to the company.
The second situation is related to the fact
that managers, as a result of large-scale
control measures and evaluation of activities,
are simply overwhelmed
with information about the results,
about the controlled indicators,
and they simply do not have time
to figure out all the indicators
they receive
and in fact do not use them.
That is, reports
on the assessment of efficiency
simply fall on the shelf
and this does not give anything to the company.
Such situations must also be avoided.
And the third situation
when the control can only harm the company
occurs when the control
is used
for other purposes.
For example,
in some companies
the control of the results of marketing activities
is carried out
exclusively to harm
its employees in one way or another
according to the results of this control.
And often in such situations
the results are bad.
More precisely, they are almost always bad
because the company sets
inevitably unattainable goals,
inevitably overestimated.
It turns out that this control
is used by the company's top managers
to achieve other goals
that have nothing to do
with the efficiency of marketing.
I would like to wish you
to avoid these mistakes
in the implementation of the control
of marketing activities.
I would like to wish you
to really use the assessment
of the efficiency of marketing
in your companies.
I would like to believe
that all the formulas we have studied
will come in handy for you
in the implementation of the control
and assessment of marketing
in your company.
Good luck in acquiring new knowledge
and thank you for your attention.